     Nowadays Russia holds the world's largest natural gas reserves and the eighth largest oil reserves. Russia is also the world's largest exporter of natural gas, the second largest oil exporter and the third largest energy consumer
       Russia’s economic growth over the past seven years has been driven primarily by energy exports, given the increase in Russian oil production and relatively high world oil prices during the period.
     Internally, Russia gets over half of its domestic energy needs from natural gas, up from around 49 percent in 1992. Since then, the share of energy use from coal and nuclear has stayed constant, while energy use from oil has decreased from 27 percent to around 19 percent. 


 

    
      Russia is a major world oil producer, sometimes producing even more than Saudi Arabia.  According to the Oil and Gas Journal, Russia has proven oil reserves of 60 billion barrels, most of which are located in Western Siberia, between the Ural Mountains and the Central Siberian Plateau. Eastern Siberia is one area where little exploration has taken place. There, only four or five oil and gas fields have been discovered.
         Russia holds the world’s largest natural gas reserves, with 1,680 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) - nearly twice the reserves in the next largest country, Iran. In 2004 Russia was the world’s largest natural gas producer (22.4 Tcf), as well as the world’s largest exporter (7.1 Tcf). 
       Gazprom, Russia's state-run natural gas monopoly, produces nearly 90 percent of Russia’s natural gas, and operates the country’s natural gas pipeline network. Gazprom is also Russia’s largest earner of hard currency, and the company’s tax payments account for around 25 percent of federal tax revenues. Despite its enormous size and significance, Gazprom is seriously encumbered by domestic regulation. By law, the company must supply the natural gas used to heat and power Russia's vast domestic market at government-regulated prices (approximately $28 per thousand cubic meters), regardless of profitability.
